# Qdrant VectorDatabase

## **What is a Vector Database?**
- A Vector Database is a **specialized system** designed to efficiently handle **high-dimensional vector data**
- A Vector databse uses **indexing, querying and retrieving** to enable advanced analysis and similarity searches.
- A vector database allow us to **understand the context or conceptual similarity of unstructured data** by representing them as vectors
  
## **When to use a vector database?**

- When we have **unstructured data** as our type of data, when the focus of the storage is to **capture the context and semantics**, and/or the use case is to build a **similarity search, recommendation system, RAG or anomaly detection**.

## What is a vector?
- A vector is a **numerical representation** of daa that can **capture the context and semantics** of a textual data
- A vector has: ID, dimensions and payload

## What is a vector ID?
- Is the **unique identifier**, and work as the **primary key in a vector database**. It's essential for associationg the vector with its corresponding "real-world" data (image, text, sound file, etc)

## What is a vector dimensions?
- Is the **core representation of the data**. At the core of every vector **is a set of numbers**, which together form a representation of the data is a **multi-dimensional space**

  ### How thes numbers are generated?
  - These numbers are generated **by embedding models**, such as deep learning algorithms and **capture the essential pattersn or relationships within the data**.
  
## What are collections?
- A collection is essentially a group of vectors (or **points**) that are **logically grouped** together based on **similarity or a specific task**
- Every vector is a collection shares the same dimensionality and can be compared using a single metric

## **What are the types of vectors?**
**Dense Vectors:** A regular vectors, generated by majority of the embedding models.

**Sparse Vectors:** Vectors with no fixed length, but only a few non-zero elements.
Useful for exact token match and collaborative filtering recommendations.

**MultiVectors:** Matrices of numbers with fixed length but variable height.
Usually obtained from late interaction models like ColBERT.
